Construction projects for the City of Spokane are initially vetted by the Integrated Capital Management (ICM) team. When financial viability has been established, the project is transferred to the office of the City Engineer (currently Dan Buller). The City Engineer will coordinate the design phase of the project with his engineering team. Once the design phase is complete and the project has been successfully bid, the project moves to the construction phase.

Public Meetings

Public meetings are intended to give the public ample opportunity to learn about (and protest against) a project. The CRM works with the Admin Team to set up the meeting and mail out meeting notification letters. See also Design Phase Components.

Public Surveys

The City conducts public project surveys to gain insight into public perceptions. Surveys are conducted using Survey Monkey. See also Appendix D: Survey Monkey.
•	CRM Login: Surveymonkey.com
•	CRM Username: mvazquez@spokanecity.org 
•	CRM Password: *****

Project Design: Design Phase

The CRM is expected to review all communications for correctness. All projects are subject to change! You must be proactive and inquire often about changes. One lesson that you will learn quickly is that you will always be the last to know.

Design Phase Components

1.	Project Charter: The project charter, which outlines the scope/location of the work to be completed is found in the DAF. The DAF document is typically located in the Design project drive under the DAF and Prelim folder. (The charter powerpoints can be found here: CHARTERS - All Documents (spokanecity.org).)
2.	Project Public Meeting(s): Although it is at the department’s discretion, most engineers will conduct a public meeting for a project. See also Appendix A: Public Outreach Matrix.
3.	Project Notification Letter/Postcard: When the design phase reaches completion, the design engineer will ask the CRM to mail out a project notification letter or postcard. See also Communications: Snail Mail.
4.	Preliminary Utility Notification Letter: The Admin Team sends out notification to utility companies informing them of the project. CRM is not involved in this process. The letter
•	requests any available information for this area that would aid and expedite the design process, including up-to-date utility location maps;
•	requests information about any structures or other facilities that may be affected by the construction in order to discuss how they may be suitably addressed;
•	inquires about any construction in the right-of-way and requests that it be completed prior to paving. The utility company should provide the engineer with drawings of any planned construction and cannot proceed with relocation or adjustment work until they have contacted the engineer.

Project Bid Components

Bidding is initiated by the civil engineer and the City Engineer. All dates are subject to change! You must be proactive and inquire often about changes. One lesson that you will learn quickly is that you will always be the last to know.
1.	Bid Advertisements:
a.	The City Engineer determines when projects will go to bid and lists those dates in the bid schedule (https://my.spokanecity.org/business/bid-and-design/current-projects/)
b.	Engineering Admin posts the bids to City’s Plan Room website (https://www.cityofspokaneplans.com/)
c.	Bids must be advertised for a minimum of 14 business days. The department typically advertises for 20 days.
2.	Bid Openings:
a.	Bid opening date is listed in the Plan Room advertisement (https://my.spokanecity.org/business/bid-and-design/current-projects/). The bids are only opened on Mondays.
b.	City Engineer must provide a recommendation to award the bid.
c.	Bids must be approval by the City Council. The approval occurs at the following Monday Council meeting. The City Engineer represents the department at the Council meeting.
d.	After Council bid approval, the contract is typically signed by the end of that week. Engineering Admin should notify CRM when the contract has been executed. 
e.	CRM updates the project web page with the contractor information. See Communications: Web section for more information.
3.	Bid Rejections:
a.	If a bidder is not qualified, the engineering team can ask for further proof. 
b.	The bid can be rejected by the City, but the bidder can appeal.
c.	The Engineering department can reject all bidders without explanation. This cannot be appealed. This is used, for example, if no bidders are qualified or the prices come in way over the estimated construction cost.
